senators doubting thomas court nominee says his personal opinion of abortion is 'irrelevant' 
asked several times by sen.
herb kohl, d-wis.
, about women's right to end their pregnancies, thomas said, "whether or not i have a view is irrelevant."; president bush, asked at a news conference whether thomas' claim not to have an opinion on abortion is credible, answered, "that's a question for the senate to decide."; "he's handling himself very well," the president said.
"i think he's doing a beautiful job up there.
i feel more confident than ever that he will be confirmed."; thomas' answers have frustrated the committee's democrats, who say he is an evasive witness.
they also have voiced skepticism about his backing away from stands he took in past writings and speeches.
committee chairman joseph biden, d-del.
, began to show signs of exasperation today during spirited questioning about the nominee's views on "natural law," a theory that certain rights exist independent of written law.
at one point, biden accused thomas of using "tortuous logic".
later, he referred to one of thomas' replies as "the most unartful dodge i've heard".
after still another thomas answer, biden said, "that's not the question i asked you, judge."; republicans tried to deflect criticism over thomas' refusal to answer questions from the democrats.
"it is, in my view, inappropriate to keep this up," said sen.
orrin hatch, r-utah.
he said thomas had been asked more than 70 questions about his abortion views even though justice david h.
souter was asked only 36 such questions during his confirmation hearings last year.
"what are we going to have? sixty-four-thousand questions on abortion before we're done with this approach"? hatch asked.
"enough is enough."; thomas said senate confirmation of his nomination would give him "an opportunity to serve and give back" and to "bring something different to the court."; "i can walk in the shoes of the people who are affected by what the court does," thomas said.
several senators were openly skeptical wednesday over thomas' insistence that he has no opinion on the 1973 supreme court decision legalizing abortion.
if that's so, said sen.
paul simon, d-ill.
, "he's the only person gathered in the room who does not have an opinion."; kohl added, "i'm concerned about his candor, his willingness to be forthcoming."; today, kohl asked the nominee, "is it fair of you to say to us, for the most part, just view me on what i'm saying here this week?"; kohl asked the black federal judge whether he was offended by published comments calling his appointment by president bush a "quota."; "that would trouble anyone," thomas said, adding, "i don't think it's accurate".
he said bush assured him he was picked because he was the best qualified of those potential nominees considered.
thomas is expected to continue testifying through friday.
the committee next week will hear from other witnesses.
two pivotal members of the 14-member committee -- howell heflin, d-ala.
, and arlen specter, r-pa.
-- also voiced concern about thomas' answers.
but the panel's traditional third swing vote, dennis deconcini, d-ariz.
, said thomas was doing well.
thomas' opponents believe republicans strom thurmond of south carolina, hatch, charles grassley of iowa, alan simpson of wyoming and hank brown of colorado are solid thomas backers.
but they hope sens.
edward m. kennedy, d-mass.
, and howard metzenbaum, d-ohio, will be joined by the three swing-vote senators and biden, patrick leahy of vermont, simon and kohl in voting against the nominee.
thomas' views; excerpts from clarence thomas' testimony:; on abortion: "i have no reason or agenda to prejudge the issue. . . or a predilection to rule one way or another on the issue of abortion."; on affirmative action: "the line that i drew was a line that said that we shouldn't have preferences, or goals, or timetables or quotas."; on natural law: "at no time did i feel, nor do i feel now, that natural law is anything more than the background to our constitution."; hear it, see it; senate confirmation hearings for supreme court nominee clarence thomas are scheduled to run through friday this week and every weekday except wednesday next week.
radio; (box) kqed, 88.5 fm tape delay beginning at 9 a.m. repeated at 9:30 p.m.
(box) kpfa, 94.1 fm live coverage begins at 6:30 a.m. television; (box) c-span live coverage begins at 7 a.m. repeated at 5 p.m.
(box) cnn intermittent coverage .
