ft  09 aug 93 / romanian coal miners flex their muscles
coalminers from romania's jiu valley, who spearheaded violent anti-reform rampages through bucharest in 1990 and 1991, are once again out on strike, pressing the government for higher wages.
but so far the government, unlike its predecessors, has not caved in.
it has instead begun legal action to have the strike, which today entered its second week, declared illegal.
the miners' position seems untenable.
romanians appear solidly opposed to the strike, angered by the miners' demands for an average wage of the equivalent of dollars 290 a month.
most workers earn less than dollars 80.
workers in the same trade union confederation as the miners have ignored appeals by their leaders to strike in solidarity.
the ministry of industry argues that the 6m tonnes of pit coal produced each year in the jiu valley's 13 mines is not a vital source of energy.
the region's coal supplies two nearby power stations but these plants, which together account for only 4 per cent of the country's electricity capacity, could also be run using lignite and gas.
the ministry further argues that the miners are in danger of pricing their coal out of the market.
according to the ministry, if the miners' pay demands were met, the cost of their coal would double.
even at present prices, ukrainian coal is being imported to the romanian market.
the strike seems motivated by a number of factors.
the rank and file have come out because they want more money to compensate for the difficult conditions in which they live and work.
they are also following the call of their charismatic leader, mr miron cosma, the man who led them on protests to bucharest and secured their earlier wage increases.
mr cosma's motive for calling the strike - for which, surprisingly, he has the support of rah, the state-owned coal mining company - are less obvious.
the ministries of industry and finance are conducting investigations into charges of fraud and embezzlement by mr cosma and several senior rah company officials.
the company's chief accountant and budget director have already been fired, following earlier investigations.
ministry of industry officials argue the strike could be an attempt to divert attention from the investigations.
mr cosma, however, appears confident.
one of his bargaining tools is the threat, albeit veiled, of fresh violence.
in response to the question as to whether he intends to lead his men, who appear to support him whole-heartedly, to bucharest again, he says: 'with miners, anything is possible'.
but he is also making political threats.
in recent months, mr cosma has claimed he has evidence that senior government officials, including president ion iliescu, called miners to bucharest as part of plans to consolidate their own power.
mr cosma appears increasingly willing to talk if his demands are not met.
it remains to be seen whether those involved in the incidents of 1990 and 1991 now feel confident enough to ignore him.
