gold and coal workers seek better pay and benefits; firms build stockpiles  
the national union of mineworkers said an estimated 200,000 black gold and coal miners in south africa will begin a strike sunday night for higher wages and better working conditions, in what it said would be the largest job action ever to affect the mining industry in that nation.
the strike initially would cover more than half of south africa's gold mines and about one-fifth of its coal mines, said cyril ramaphosa, the union's general secretary.
if workers in mines not included in current negotiations join in sympathy strikes, a total of 300,000 miners could be on strike, he said.
gold and coal account for more than half of south africa's foreign-currency earnings.
the union's announcement produced little immediate reaction on south african financial markets, where analysts said a strike had been expected and probably wouldn't have much impact unless it lasted more than a month.
mine owners reportedly have been building stockpiles for several weeks in anticipation of a strike.
mining companies' shares rose along with the price of gold, but the metal's rise came mainly in reaction to increased tensions in the persian gulf.
the south african rand was slightly firmer.
mr. ramaphosa said the union is demanding a 30%, across-the-board wage increase for black miners, who the union says earn an average of 225 rand ($109) a month.
the chamber of mines, which represents the nation's six biggest mining houses, says black miners earn about twice that much.
it implemented wage increases ranging from 15% to 23.4% last month.
anglo american corp.
, the huge south african mining house, warned against a strike, saying miners had received a good wage increase in july and wouldn't gain further raises by a job action.
but "at this stage it seems the strike seems inevitable," said mr.
ramaphosa, who added that there hadn't been any negotiations with management since a strike ballot received "overwhelming support" during the week of july 12.
he also warned of possible confrontations with police, saying: "we have issued instructions to our members that if they are attacked they should defend themselves".
miners' strikes in recent years have featured clashes with police, leaving dozens of people dead.
"the total mines that will be affected are 28 gold mines around the country and 18 collieries," the union official said.
"our union is at the same time in dispute with a number of other companies, where strike action could take place at any time, should the various mine managements refuse to accede to our members' demands".
he said such other companies included de beers consolidated mines ltd.
, the world's largest diamond miner.
in addition to the general wage increase, mr.
ramaphosa said the union is demanding pay for black miners doing dangerous work.
the black miners also are asking for 30 days' leave each year, and a paid holiday on june 16, the anniversary of the 1976 soweto riots.
they also want an increase in death benefits to five years from two.
