egyptian ferry sinks - 462 lost
investigators were looking into complaints from some survivors that the crew abandoned the ferry without helping passengers and that some crew members pushed aside passengers to get to lifeboats.
moharram said he helped 17 passengers put on life jackets.
he said the ferry sank quickly saturday night after being tossed into a coral reef by stormy seas.
moharram said the coral cut a hole in the ship's side, and water also entered through the boarding doors.
only seven bodies have been recovered since the ferry went down, leaving 462 people missing.
today, the deputy security chief for egypt's ports said searchers have not given up.
"we are looking for both survivors and bodies," said brig.
gen. abdel-karim el-gazzar.
"we haven't lost all hope that there may be some survivors, although the odds are against it.
but you never can tell."; survivors said that after the ferry hit the reef, crew members herded them to one side of the listing boat, then pushed passengers aside to get to lifeboats.
"they went off in a boat," passenger abdel-a'ati hassan, 31, said from his hospital bed.
"they left us with women and kids, who died."; hassan said the ship sank within 15 minutes of hitting the reef.
during that time, he said, he saw no crew members helping passengers.
"the crew told us to stand on one side.
they wore life preservers and left us and even pushed us aside to escape," he said.
"they could have had time to help."; many survivors spent hours in shark-infested waters or in lifeboats before being picked up.
egypt's director of port security, hassan al-aghouri, said the rescue was delayed by the storm.
at safaga central hospital, mustafa ahmed, 38, said he pulled 13 people into a lifeboat.
"i found a rope and clung to it, and then i found a capsized lifeboat," ahmed said.
"i managed to get 13 people who were around me in the sea onto the boat.
we waited until a ship rescued us at around noon."; prime minister atef sidki, who traveled to safaga, said many passengers may have been on lifeboats driven far from the wreckage by strong winds.
however, many bodies were expected to be found in the hull of the ferry.
efforts to lift it began today.
u.s. navy helicopter crews reported "lots of wreckage including life preservers, rafts and floating material" where the ferry went down.
they said the 1,105-ton ferry lay on its starboard -- or right-hand -- side, with its port side protruding from the water.
lt. gen.
salah halaby, chief of staff of egypt's armed forces, said 30 egyptian navy divers were searching for victims or, less likely, survivors.
the salem express sank after a trip from jiddah, saudi arabia, to safaga, 290 miles south of cairo.
many passengers -- all but 10 of the 649 people aboard were egyptians -- were muslims returning from pilgrimages to mecca, and others were coming home after working in saudi arabia.
ahmed gamal sobhi, safaga's city council chairman, said four bodies were recovered by egyptian vessels and helicopters by nightfall, and bad weather stopped the search sunday.
