this time, the entire city of tampa is involved in the hoopla 
things are different; he says he only wished the black community could have shared in some of the considerable profits generated by one of america's greatest sports events.
"the super bowl is about money," carley said last week.
"and last time we were basically onlookers."; things are a lot different this time around.
this year, carley is the co-chairman of one of the featured events of super bowl week, the bambaleo parade, a saturday extravaganza with marching bands, a street festival and floats.
the grand marshal of the parade will be lee roy selmon, a former tampa bay buccaneer.
other events will include a salute to black sports legends and a doug williams golf tournament.
'much more involvement'; this year, the super bowl task force, a group headed by two of the city's most influential white businessmen, named two black men to head a community-relations committee.
but perhaps most important, carley said, several minority-owned businesses have won lucrative contracts from the nfl for the game.
"there's much more involvement this time, black and white," said carley, who is the affirmative-action officer for hillsboro community college.
"there's been a heightened awareness.
in 1984, there was not even a thought given to a black man."; about 100,000 visitors, many of them corporate and political movers and shakers, were expected to arrive in tampa this week for the festivities leading up to the game sunday.
the game itself, which is televised to 750 million people around the world, is only part of an event whose impact on a city has been compared to that of a national political convention.
hotels, restaurants and other businesses are anticipating an estimated $125 million in revenues, with a total economic impact of $200 million.
'it's a bay window'; "the super bowl introduces you to the world in a big way," said barbara casey, the coordinator of the super bowl task force.
"you don't have to say tampa, fla.
, anymore."; the super bowl also can highlight a community's problems, and bring the frustrations of many of its members to the surface.
"it's more than a window into a town," said jim steeg, director of special events for the nfl.
"it's a bay window."; last month, nfl commissioner paul tagliabue said he would stand by his recommendation to move the 1993 super bowl out of tempe, ariz.
, because the state does not have a holiday honoring dr.
martin luther king.
a week before the super bowl in miami two years ago, the fatal shooting of a black man on a motorcycle by an hispanic police officer in the predominantly black overtown neighborhood set off three days of looting and torchings of buildings and cars.
while the disturbances were not caused by the super bowl, the nfl was criticized at the time for not making enough of an effort to include minority-group members in the festivities.
"i think miami was the awakening for a lot of people," carley said.
in tampa, super bowl xxv brought about the cancellation of what was the biggest annual event in the city for 86 years: the gasparilla parade, an extravaganza that featured 500 of the city's most powerful men swaggering through the streets dressed as gun-toting pirates.
tampa officials made the parade part of their pitch to the nfl for the super bowl.
but after tampa was awarded the 1991 super bowl, a racial dispute erupted over the parade, which always has been sponsored and organized by an all-white, all-male private club, ye mystic krewe of gasparilla.
the club's top officials refused the demands of a coalition of black residents, including carley, that the club be integrated immediately.
instead, they canceled the parade.
the super bowl task force had to scramble to put together a new parade, and carley became the co-chairman of that effort.
super bowl xxvi; super bowl xxvi will be played jan.
26, 1992, in the metrodome.
it will be minneapolis' first time as the host city.
the last time the super bowl was held in a cold-climate city was in 1982, when the 49ers beat the cincinnati bengals 26-21 in pontiac, mich.
