vacation? how about a marathon?   
but a unique subset has formed: people who like to do both at the same time.
and to help these folks along, companies arrange tours for marathon vacations.
the result? bangkok in november, london in april and stockholm in may.
"skiers have mountain ranges, tennis players have resorts, why can't a runner take a marathon vacation"? said thorn gilligan, president of marathon tours in boston.
"a runner should be able to enjoy a closed city for a day.
it's a celebration for the sport as much as a competition."; gilligan took 5,500 people last year on 20 tours to countries from bermuda to moscow.
in addition to air fare and hotel, runners are guaranteed spots in restricted entry races such as the london marathon.
qualifying times are not required.
london, the most popular european city to visit, holds the world's largest marathon (april 12 next year).
berlin's race (sept.
27, 1992) has grown with the demise of the wall.
"most marathons take you through cities, so you get a chance to see things you'd never see on a sightseeing bus," said fred lebow, president of the new york roadrunner's club and director of the new york marathon.
lebow has run in 32 marathons, including london, paris, rome, stockholm, iceland, seoul and vienna.
"the most exciting thing is the start of the race," he said.
"each city has something unique."; the cities are different, but most marathons include a carbo-loading pasta party the night before, medical exams, a post-race celebration, commemorative t-shirts and awards to finishers.
entry fees vary; brussels is $16, venice $40.
marathon tours includes the entry price in the package.
going to bermuda, for example, costs approximately $900 from san francisco.
the price includes round-trip air fare, four days and three nights at the grotto bay beach hotel (per person, based on double occupancy), full breakfasts and dinners, a welcome cocktail party and post-race parties and discounts.
england has similar organizations: sports tours international and keith prowse, a company that specializes in british theater, sports and concert tours.
but it isn't necessary to run 26.2 miles to go on a running vacation, especially if it's a family trip.
some marathons, like portland's, include additional races: a five-mile run, a five-mile walk and a kids run.
tel aviv has a half-marathon and a fun run.
budapest offers a half-marathon and a mini-marathon along the danube.
there are also trips that incorporate running into the sightseeing schedule.
running coach pat savage and hal higdon, a senior writer for runner's world, are taking a group to ireland in june.
the eight-day trip will leave from chicago and will include sightseeing, guided runs and a fun run from malahide castle to swords.
"on a running vacation you plan something around running everyday," higdon said.
"we know the unique scenic routes and put together special runs."; some runs are intriguing because of current events.
the tel aviv marathon course went past houses hit by scud missiles during the gulf war.
the belgrade marathon was held despite yugoslavia's turmoil.
the munich course is the same as the 1972 olympic route and finishes in the same stadium.
running 26 miles just to see a city definitely isn't for everyone, but at the very least, it's a way to kill two birds with one stone.
in the recent chicago marathon, a german man ran with a camera, snapping photos every few miles.
if you're interested; if you're interested in combining a vacation and marathon, here are some firms to contact:; (box) marathon tours, 108 main st.
, charlestown, mass.
02129. (617) 242-7845.
(box) roadrunner tours, 2815 lake shore dr.
, michigan city, ind.
46360. (219) 879-0133.
(box) keith prowse, based in england.
(8oo) 6my-tour.
(box) sports tours international, 91 walkdon rd., walkdon, worslay, manchester m28 5dq, united kingdom.
(061) 703-8161.
