who's really behind coup? conspiracy theories abound
cut to a row of dour communists in ill-fitting gray suits announcing gorbachev's illness and a palace coup.
the camera zooms in on the impassive faces of the two men last seen in gorbachev's office.
what is going on here? ok, it's a hackneyed device that would only work in the movies.
but then, this week's events in the soviet union have all the makings of a spy thriller.
kremlinologists who dabble in conspiracy theories are working overtime, though they insist that their darkest imaginings be clearly labeled "pure speculation."; "once you have a palace coup, the possibilities are endless," said robert conquest, a senior research fellow at the hoover institution.
"russian politics are full of very strange things."; for all we know, conquest joked, gorbachev could be injected with drugs to change his personality or kgb scientists could produce a body-double to impersonate him.
"his friends would know, but would you or i"? conquest said.
"that would be going a bit far."; a more intriguing scenario has gorbachev conspiring with the coup plotters to engineer a transformation of the soviet political landscape.
the thinking goes like this:; with his popularity at rock bottom, gorbachev, a lifelong creature of the kgb, hatches a false coup in order to step out of the way while hard-liners and liberals battle each other.
the coup falls apart and gorbachev triumphantly returns with a level of legitimacy he never enjoyed before.
the theory could explain the apparent bungling of the coup plotters, said author joseph finder, whose 1991 novel, "the moscow club," foreshadowed many of the elements of the current crisis.
finder, who said he did not subscribe to the scenario, nonetheless pointed out that tanks did not begin to roll until hours after gorbachev's supposed arrest.
russian president boris yeltsin was not arrested, and leningrad was left alone.
speculation was not unique to kremlin watchers in the united states.
theorizing was rampant in the streets of moscow on tuesday, said san francisco businesswoman kimberly getto, who sent a long fax detailing speculation, fueled by the fact that many of the tanks encircling the russian parliament building had no ammunition.
gorbachev did not want bloodshed, according to the theory.
the democratic reform movement, headed by former foreign minister eduard shevardnadze, gorbachev's longtime ally, floated the same possibility in a statement monday.
"it's highly implausible, but not to be excluded, that gorbachev himself agreed to a withdrawal, thinking he'd show them they still needed him," said norman naimark, director of stanford's center for russian and east european studies.
"the degree of connivance is difficult to gauge".
