ft  07 apr 92 / international company news: founder most important retailer
sam walton was arguably the most important retailer of his generation.
the son of an oklahoma real-estate broker, he opened the first general store in what was to become the wal-mart chain in bentonville, in the backwaters of arkansas, in 1950, writes martin dickson.
by 1991 the chain's sales had risen to nearly dollars 44bn, making it the world's largest retailer in terms of revenues, and the walton family probably america's richest.
wal-mart now operates in 43 us states, selling goods ranging from detergents to golf clubs.
the chain's success stemmed both from mr walton's personality and willingness to challenge accepted retailing orthodoxy.
he was a frugal, modest man who worked extremely long hours from a spartan room in his bentonville headquarters but delighted in getting out of the office to tour stores and meet customers and staff, whom he insisted on calling 'associates'.
he would deliver pep-talks to employees extolling the virtues of thrift and customer satisfaction, long before these became fashionable management buzz-words.
employee satisfaction - an idea which is only now gaining wider acceptance in us service industries - was also a vital ingredient in the walton philosophy.
he buoyed staff morale with cheer-leading sessions, bonus payments for good performance and profit-sharing plans which allowed some employees of very modest means to retire relatively wealthy.
eight years ago, when wal-mart's profits were better than expected, he kept a promise to staff by dressing in a grass-skirt to dance the hula on wall street.
also essential to wal-mart's growth was its pioneering of high volume, cut-price retailing throughout the year, rather than the periodic sales which rivals relied on to generate customer loyalty.
'low prices always' became wal-mart's motto.
mr walton also disproved the conventional wisdom that large discount stores could not operate successfully in the small, rural towns of the us south.
it was precisely such locations which became the bedrock of the business, though in the process wal-mart put out of business hundreds of small main street stores, prompting bitter resistance in some towns which mr walton tended to blunt with generous charitable donations.
