one man's struggle 
from behind bars, nelson mandela has dominated the fight for black rights in south africa.
the following are some of the key events in his life.
1944 mandela joins the african national congress at age 26, later becoming president of the group's youth league.
in a short time, the anc becomes the force behind black protests.
when the national party comes to power in 1948, the anc begins planning a campaign of civil disobedience to fight the party's apartheid policy.
june, 1952 mandela is named leader of the campaign and breaks curfew as the first act of defiance.
in december, he is arrested and charged under suppression of communism act.
he gets a suspended sentence and is barred from attending meetings or leaving johannesburg.
december, 1956 a campaign of civil disobedience by the anc results in mandela being detained along with 155 others and charged with treason.
the trial, which lasts until 1961, ends in acquittal.
march, 1960 sixty-nine black protesters are killed by police in sharpeville; a state of emergency is declared and the anc is outlawed.
january, 1962 attends pan-african freedom movement conference in ethiopia; travels to london to meet with leftists.
in august he is charged with incitement and leaving the country illegally; gets five-year jail term.
july, 1963 with mandela in jail, police raid anc offices, seizing documents outlining guerrilla campaign.
mandela, seven others are charged with sabotage and conspiracy to overthrow the government.
april-june, 1964 mandela and seven others are sentenced to life in prison.
may, 1984 mandela is allowed a visit with his wife -- the first since 1962.
january, 1985 president pieter w.
botha offers to free mandela if he renounces violence; mandela refuses until the government takes steps to dismantle apartheid and grants full political rights to blacks.
july, 1988 mandela turns 70.
a rock concert in london is held in his honor.
but south africa bans all local celebrations.
august, 1988 mandela contracts tuberculosis and is transferred to a hospital.
three months later he is taken to a prison farm in paarl and placed in a house usually reserved for prison employees.
july, 1989 mandela meets with outgoing president botha at the presidential mansion.
one week later, mandela is allowed to make his first officially sanctioned public statement since his conviction.
his statement makes clear his position has not changed in 28 years.
december, 1989 president frederik w.
de klerk meets mandela for the first time.
february, 1990 de klerk lifts anc ban and says mandela will be released.
on feb.
11, the nation's best-known black leader becomes a free man at last.
