s. africa's next step: ban weapons, negotiates
in the 15 months since he walked free from prison, nelson mandela has played the chief role in talks with president f.w. de klerk and the white government.
he has presided over an african national congress divided and not yet organized for politics.
he has spent his moral capital trying, unsuccessfully, to end the murderous conflict between black political factions.
now mandela is confronted with his wife's conviction for a brutal criminal offense.
he has loyally defended her innocence.
he has seemed to hear no voice to the contrary.
but events have caught up.
the radicals in the anc may well use the trial and conviction of mrs.
mandela to arouse members against nelson mandela's policy of peace and negotiation.
there are rumors that at a national conference next month the radicals will try to move such older leaders as mandela and walter sisulu aside to a nominal senior role.
it is a gloomy picture: an elderly man bearing the hopes of peace in south africa beset by problems, personal trauma on top of political.
but i think it would be wrong to conclude that the south african drama is necessarily heading toward a tragic end. one reason for a degree of optimism is the way south africans on all sides, most of them, have dealt with winnie mandela's trial: calmly and fairly.
during the years of white supremacy the law has been viciously misused.
but from all one can tell, this trial was handled professionally by the judge, justice michael stegmann.
the reaction to the verdict and six-year prison sentence was also mild.
surprisingly few supporters gathered outside the court to cheer mrs.
mandela. the anc issued a detached statement saying that the last word had not been spoken in the case.
archbishop desmond tutu said "the movement is larger than any individual."; a more fundamental reason for hope is that f.w. de klerk and nelson mandela -- and those for whom they speak -- have a common interest in creating a new, non-racial south africa.
they need each other.
without their agreement, there can be no solution, no outcome that leaves a viable country.
the next step is formal negotiations.
they can come only when the government takes further steps to meet the reasonable anc demand for action against violence -- in particular, a ban on the carrying of so-called "cultural" weapons such as spears.
how can the government look away when 1,000 zulus carrying spears and machetes slaughter township residents? the time factor is crucial now.
negotiations must start soon if the moderate center of the public, black and white, is to retain hope for a peaceful solution.
world and time press on nelson mandela.
