ft  30 sep 94 / leading article: defying the cruel sea
ferries are among the safest vessels afloat.
but, as the tragic sinking of the estonia with the loss of more than 800 lives demonstrates, when they do go down the toll in human life can be high.
as ferries increase in size, so the numbers on board at risk from mechanical failure or a crew error go up.
the move to roll-on roll-off ferries with vehicle decks which run the entire length of the vessel has increased the risk that, once the sea penetrates the hold through the bow doors or a gash in the ship's side, it can lead to the vessel capsizing.
the united nations international maritime organisation (imo) and its members, the ship-owning nations, have devoted much thought over the past two decades to ship safety.
but the sinking of the estonia should lead to a new review of ferry safety.
particularly worrying are the eyewitness reports which suggest that water penetrated the bow doors in a manner reminiscent of the sinking of the herald of free enterprise in 1987.
unlike the herald, the estonia appears to have had its doors closed, but ro-ros are undoubtedly very vulnerable to water penetration.
any review of ferry safety should focus on three main issues.
first the subject of ferry design should be reconsidered.
additional stability could be provided by the addition of sponsons, stabilising bulges which project from the ship's side just above the water line.
greater resistance to an influx of water could be obtained by installing moveable barriers or bulkheads to break up the large car decks.
these proposals were looked at by the british government in the wake of the sinking of the herald of free enterprise.
it calculated that it would cost between pounds 70m and pounds 85m to improve standards on the 57 vessels in the uk ferry fleet, with a further pounds 22m in extra annual running costs.
higher costs would inevitably lead to higher fares - unwelcome to ferry operators when, on the short cross-channel routes, they face competition from the channel tunnel.
but the difficulty of pushing through fare rises would be nothing like as damaging to the ferry companies as another disaster.
second, the imo and national governments must look closely at how to improve enforcement of existing regulations.
the imo has been trying to move enforcement up its agenda, but it depends on the good will and professionalism of governments and shipowners.
third, the imo should be given support by national governments in its campaign, launched yesterday, to improve crew training.
much of the regulation in recent years has concentrated on improving the ship and its equipment.
above all, if new regulation does turn out to be necessary, it must be introduced speedily.
as things stand, it can take years before changes are ratified by enough governments to give them force.
the european union, which sweden and finland are getting ready to join, could take a lead in speeding up the process.
ship safety is not, of course, just an issue for the ferry sector.
five (small) ferries were lost last year, according to lloyd's register.
but this figure pales into insignificance compared with the 96 general cargo ships and 12 tankers which also went down.
when a cargo vessel with a third-world crew goes down in a distant ocean, very little attention is paid.
if the loss of a relatively modern passenger vessel in european waters can make shipping safety a higher priority for governments and the public, this will be some small compensation for the loss of life from the estonia.
