ft  13 mar 93 / bombay blasts leave 200 dead: federal troops flown in after wave of bombings on commercial targets
the indian government flew federal paramilitary troops into bombay last night after more than a dozen bombs exploded in the city, killing about 200 people and injuring more than a thousand.
the devices, mostly car bombs, appeared to be a systematic attack on india's commercial heart.
all exploded within 90 minutes in the afternoon.
among the targets were the bombay stock exchange, the landmark air india building, a shopping complex, and two hotels near the airport.
the identity of the bombers was unknown, but the attacks were a severe setback to india's attempts to heal the wounds created by recent intercommunal violence, which has caused deep shock throughout india.
more than 2,000 people died in riots, including over 700 in bombay, after the razing of a mosque at ayodhya in northern india by hindu zealots on december 6.
the bombs appeared designed to stir a renewal of communal strife and to undermine efforts by the government of mr pv narasimha rao to open up the economy and attract foreign investment and tourism.
one of the targets was close to the headquarters of shiv sena, a hindu nationalist party accused of fomenting violence during the riots, in which most victims were moslems.
national and local state leaders appealed for calm in an attempt to prevent a renewed outbreak of violence.
mr rao urged the nation to ignore rumours after the 'inhuman and criminal bomb blasts'.
mr sharad pawar, the former federal defence minister just re-appointed chief minister of maharashtra state, said all roads into bombay had been blocked and the army put on alert.
he said: 'it is aimed at disrupting the economy and it appears a conscious effort because only bombay seems to be the target'.
mr shankarrao chavan, the federal home (interior) minister, told parliament in new delhi: 'we suspect an international conspiracy'.
the indian high commission in london said the attacks were 'part of the externally supported terrorism which has targeted india for some time'.
however, indian officials stopped short of directly accusing pakistan, the country's arch-enemy.
the bomb attacks were spread throughout the city and were clearly aimed at the city's better-off business people - in contrast to the riots in which victims were mainly poor.
at the 28-storey stock exchange building, about 3,000 people were on the second-storey trading floor when a bomb exploded in the underground car park, hurling shards of glass across the floor and into the street.
some victims were crushed in the stampede to escape.
outside, burned bodies lay among litter from shattered buildings.
