ft  10 sep 92 / arts: booker prize shortlist
the annual booker ballyhoo got going again yesterday when the judges for this year's pounds 20,000 prize for british (and commonwealth) fiction announced the shortlist.
the prize (courtesy of booker plc, the food and agri-business group) is no longer the richest literary award but it guarantees great prestige, and sales, for the winner, and, say its admirers, helpfully brings the novel to public attention.
its critics say that the autumn brouhaha distorts the annual fiction industry and the intense media hype of the shortlisted authors does a disservice to the hordes of other gifted but unlisted writers.
this year's shortlist contains no surprises.
london's litterati have for weeks been betting on michael ondaatje's the english patient - those of them who have seen a proof copy because it is not officially published until next week.
last night the bookmakers william hill made it the 5-2 favourite.
the shortlist is: serenity house by christopher hope (macmillan pounds 14.99). black comedy by a master south africa-born specialist in the trade.
set in a highgate 'eventide refuge' where euthanasia is an unspoken word and its senior citizen, max montfalcon, turns out to be a geriatric nazi scientist.
the ft review next saturday will describe it as 'surreal farce..
scabrously enjoyable '..
the butcher's boy by patrick mccabe (picador pounds 14.99). an irish murderer, a soft-in-the-head orphan jailed for life, recalls his life in grisly detail.
the ft reviewer said that 'the misery and deprivation of working class life have never been so brutally evoked '..
black dogs by ian mcewan (secker & warburg pounds 14.99). mcewan's fiction is uniquely disturbing - some would say deliberately offensive.
he is the novelist of misanthropy.
this is the tale of a failed marriage, episodically told, and the black dogs of evil are both metaphorical and literal.
the english patient by michael ondaatje (bloomsbury pounds 14.99). the sri lankan poet and novelist ondaatje, who lives in canada, has followed 'in the skin of a lion' with an extraordinary book about four characters in a tuscan villa in the closing months of the last war.
the central metaphor is bombs - disposal of, and then hiroshima.
the 'english patient' is a central mystery around which the others' stories orbit: he fell out of the sky in flames; who is he? the ft review on saturday will hail it as a masterpiece.
daughters of the house by michele roberts (virago pounds 14.99). the surprise contender because it is not yet published.
roberts comes from an anglo-french catholic background and this informs her new novel with a strong rural-normandy atmosphere.
two cousins, one pious, one worldly.
shades of saint therese of lisieux.
lots of action in the kitchen; something is hidden in the cellar.
sacred hunger by barry unsworth (hamish hamilton pounds 15.99). unsworth's massive novel about the 1750s slave trade came out early this year to widespread critical praise.
the shipboard detail - the horrors of the trade -are brilliantly done.
the judges will have to rule on the characterisation of the european protagonists who go off to found a utopia in florida.
the judges this year, who will include independent journalist mark lawson and john coldstream, literary editor of the daily telegraph, will be chaired by the biographer victoria glendinning.
the winner will be named at a guildhall dinner on tuesday october 13.
last year the prize was won by ben okri, for his book the famished road.
