crash kills tower, 22 others ex-senator's daughter also among victims   
another victim was dr.
nicholas davies, president-elect of the american college of physicians, a 60,000-member industry group, said dr.
louis felder, who worked with davies at piedmont hospital in atlanta.
none of the 20 passengers or three crew members aboard atlantic southeast airlines flight 2311 survived.
the crash followed by one day the plane-helicopter collision that killed sen.
john heinz of pennsylvania and six other people.
tower, 65, and his daughter marian, 35, boarded the 30-passenger, turboprop embraer 120 in atlanta and were headed to sea island, off the georgia coast, for a party in tower's honor.
officials said they did not know the cause of the crash.
the plane was descending in clear weather, authorities said, when it went down at 2:47 p.m. about three miles northeast of the runway at the brunswick-glynco jetport.
witnesses said the plane appeared to have fallen straight from the sky.
"it just went straight down.
there was no cropping of trees," said lt.
jack hopper of the glynn county police department, quoting witnesses.
"it started in on its nose, and i knew it was in trouble," said james griner, who lives a quarter-mile from the airport.
"i went to the plane, but i couldn't get to it because of the fire.
.. . when i got to it, it looked compacted."; atlantic southeast's senior vice president, john beiser, said officials had no indication from the pilot that the flight was in trouble.
donald day, the airline's manager of consumer affairs, described the aircraft as "extremely sophisticated and fuel-efficient, one of the backbones of our commuter fleet".
he said the plane was new and had been put in service in december.
the brazilian-made embraer 120 is manufactured by empresa brasileira de aeronautica sa.
in 1984, an embraer 110 bandeirante, an earlier model of the 120, crashed in jacksonville, fla.
, killing 13 people.
the federal aviation administration subsequently ordered an inspection of all embraers for possible sheared or worn rivets in the tail sections.
tower's death prompted words of grief and praise among his former colleagues on capitol hill, even those who helped derail his elevation to the cabinet in 1989.
"i'm deeply saddened by the loss of john tower, a tough, able friend and patriot," said sen.
lloyd bentsen, d-texas, who broke ranks with most democrats to support president bush's nomination of the 24-year senate veteran to be defense secretary.
"he was intelligent and had independence of judgment."; senate armed services committee chairman sam nunn, d-ga.
, who led the successful fight against tower's confirmation, said: "america had lost a patriot.
. . . he fought for freedom and worked diligently to make the world more secure."; "it's so sad," bush said.
"it is a tragic loss" .
